---
title: The Last of us Part II is not an uplifting experience. Maybe. 
author: Karim Arabi
date: 2022-06-15
tags: ["featured"]
image: /assets/blog/last-of-us-2.jpeg
imageAlt: This is a test
description: It’s impossible to write about this game without immediately inviting strong discussion and controversy. Nonetheless, being as polarizing as it is, The Last of Us Part II is more interested in staying true to its narrative vision than it is in being a crowd pleasing blockbuster. This piece is about my personal experience with that narrative.
---

It’s impossible to write about this game without immediately inviting strong discussion and controversy. Nonetheless, being as polarizing as it is, The Last of Us Part II is more interested in staying true to its narrative vision than it is in being a crowd pleasing blockbuster. This piece is about my personal experience with that narrative.

Part I opens with misery: we watch Joel lose his daughter and the world around him descends into madness. 20 years later, the quarantine zones are hostile with routine executions, residents taking on shifty jobs for ration cards, and frequent attacks from a revolutionary militia. There are also relationships on display here, but they feel hollow. The only conversations we hear, both from our protagonists and from passersby, mostly revolve around new regulations and smuggling deals. Joel and Tess go through life on autopilot and meander with no purpose. 

Despite this bleak beginning, Part I is largely about finding our humanity even when all seems lost. Joel goes from a stoic cold-hearted survivor to a person that’s willing to open up and trust in another human being, a prospect he probably never expected or even wanted for his future. The giraffe scene is the most talked about part of that game, and for good reason: it’s one of few moments where I genuinely forgot about the harrowing experiences I’d had fighting through clickers and bloaters, or the pain of losing the friends we’d made along the way. Despite it all, I had this brief moment of reprieve and connection, and I wanted to fight to hold on to it. And with that perception, it’s not that hard to understand why Joel makes that definitive choice at the end of the game. Though morally dubious, it’s an incredibly human reaction.

And then Part II happened. If Part I offered us a journey of rediscovering our humanity, Part II is about how easy it is to lose it. This world won’t let us forget and move on from the past. In contrast to the first game, Part II opens with unexpected normalcy. Despite occasional talk of patrols or infected, Jackson is far removed from the hellish world we experienced in the first game. The residents have electricity, snowball fights, and dances. Ellie’s biggest trouble is relationship drama (a nice callback to her musing on a diary she finds in the first game). And yet, there’s an uneasy sense to the quiet. Ellie and Joel’s relationship is shown to be pleasant, but there’s something off in their interactions. And when we’re briefly shown the introduction of outsiders to this group, our suspicions are confirmed. 

Joel’s death is a horrific one, and the tone of the game never recovers after it. Its efficacy is reflected by the hatred it elicits from both Ellie and the player. And thus the game presents its riskiest challenge yet: It was easy to connect to an innocent and spirited kid. What about a person we hate? Whether this challenge succeeded for someone or not, no one can deny its relevance for the series’ central theme. And though the journey to get there is somber, I appreciate the direction that Naughty Dog took the story in, even if it meant alienating some fans in favor of that theme.

Witnessing Ellie’s spiral into a callous and unfeeling killer is compelling but hard to watch, and seeing her push away her friends and family to feed her obsession is disheartening. It brings to mind Amleth’s reduction to his base animal-like desire for vengeance in The Northman. But where Amleth’s compulsion is spawned from his indoctrination, Ellie’s comes from self-hatred. She pushed away the person closest to her in her life, and never got the opportunity to mend their relationship or say goodbye. When I saw Ellie get dragged under the waves and still try to reach the aquarium after having fought through countless dangers, I realized she probably never even intended to come back from this mission. 

On the other end of the spectrum, Abby’s story was one of a different nature. I resented her, and understanding her motive for killing Joel certainly didn’t excuse it, but watching her try to take responsibility for her actions and make something better of her life did make me want to see her ultimately succeed in that goal. And when the two stories finally link, and I’m given control of Abby and told to hunt down my ‘monster’, just as I had been told to do so with Ellie at the beginning of the game, I felt a surge of anxiety. I wanted to put a stop to it, and I wanted these people to get better, just as Joel had been able to do in the first game. And one of them is able to, because Abby had already given in to her hatred once, and she’d spent the last half of the game reconciling with that notion. The same can’t be said for Ellie. 

It can be tempting to view this game as a demoralizing experience. It’s certainly filled with plenty of dreary moments. However, I believe the game’s ending stands in defiance of that. When Ellie once more finds what she has convinced herself is the source of her distress and ailment, she is instead confronted with an emaciated and pleading Abby, a far cry from the foe she faced at the theater. Instead, her final challenge is to will herself to continue to live. And when she manages to let go, we know that she’ll find a way to move on, even when all seems lost.